without further Ado I'm really excited
to introduce our first Speaker of the
day then Maury soundarajan
um who is a is I've had so much I've had
such an amazing time getting to know and
learning from over the past few weeks
leading up to the festival
then Maury is a Dali American Artist
technologist and the executive director
of equality labs and art and Technology
startup supporting South Asia's Asian
religious cultural and genderqueer
communities in the United States and
South Asia through her work she
organizes communities to fight impunity
State violence anti-blackness cast
apartheid and religious intolerance her
work has been recognized by the Robert
Rosenberg Foundation producers Guild of
America Diversity Program and the Museum
of Contemporary Art and Magnum
Foundation
with that we're going to turn over to
the Morris talk and we'll be back
afterwards for some q a please drop your
questions into the chat we'll try to get
to as many as we can
hi everybody my name is thin Mori and
I'm here from equality labs and it's my
honor and my pleasure to be joining you
all here at the gray area festival and
you know part of why I was so excited to
be able to help kick off the
conversations today
um about the worlds that we want to
build whether virtual material or
spiritual is because I think that you
know what we imagine really matters
you know in the work that I do both as
an activist and as a technologist and as
a futurist I find that most people
cannot begin to fight for freedom
because they cannot imagine themselves
to be free
and as a result what we do in the
imaginary is so crucial and what I think
is so profound at this moment is that at
a time when we are facing multiple
crises and we are seeing you know big
Tech amplify violence because of those
crisises that instead of us pausing and
taking a moment to reflect about where
we are as a species and the kinds of
tools we need to bring in another way
forward we are seeing a doubling down of
violent approaches to technology and
World building and I think there's no
bigger you know example of this as the
current discourse around the metaverse
and for folks who don't know the
metaverse like no I'm not talking about
the multi the Multiverse as seen by DC
Comics but I'm talking about this notion
that the next phase of the internet that
is going to be one where there was a
shared virtual environment that you know
from infrastructure to
interactivity uh is one in which we
imagine this to be another
um you know possible place that we will
engage as a species with each other and
conduct all of the the aspects of
society within it and you know the thing
I was so troubled by is that the
announcement of the metaverse wasn't
just that the metaverse is the next
future and this is where we're going to
be but that it was actually coming from
companies like Facebook and Marx you
know Mark Zuckerberg's like you know
great ambition to have Facebook be the
center of the metaverse you know whether
it's his investments in you know you
know thousands of engineers in Europe or
the aggressive Rebrand that they're
making to move beyond the social media
platform world into the building of this
new augmented reality of the metaverse
and the thing that struck me about it is
that all of the people that were talking
about the metaverse were white CIS men
in Silicon Valley many of whom really
should not be building any Tech at all
at this point
and you know and I think that in many
ways like what we need to do is have a
whole reset in terms of the ways that we
look at and build technology because how
we're doing it right now is not working
and when you take into you know for
example something like Facebook I mean
Facebook is a company that was built by
college grads at Harvard to basically
you know pick up hot chicks right that
is not and then this platform was
further invested in by the CIA because
when you map social networks you create
a lot of intelligence that's useful to
weaponize for the state and this
platform then was created without any of
the cultural competencies or
relationships of consent or processes of
co-designed and Equitable
sharing of knowledge and profits and
data in the global South and essentially
created without ethics for the sense of
profit and I think that what has been
begotten from this terrible process is
you know the widespread decimation of
multiple democracies in the world
and you know to me that is so striking
that like you know if I were you know in
charge of a multi-billion dollar company
that happened to be responsible for
genocides in uh Myanmar you know a
social media war in Syria
um the imminent genocide that's
happening in India and a coup in the
United States I would for one perhaps
not invest in a PR rollout that says
we're going to be building more Tech
that is Thoughtless and not responsible
or accountable
I would actually maybe say I should stop
and as a Buddhist I think that's a very
profound thing to say we don't have to
continue in Mindless ways we can
actually pause and reflect and you know
it for me I think that it's important
when harm is done that we don't just Ram
through the harm we have to sit down and
be able to process both what was lost
and also create space for those that
have been harmed to help Envision what
would restore themselves and I think in
all of the aspects that we see when
we're looking at Big Tech that is not
happening and I think that we have an
opportunity with the metaverse
conversations to Pivot the conversation
differently because even with big Tech
you know big Tech is representative of
many iterations of techno technological
development that has been ushered in by
white supremacist institutions that have
not served the species but has served
you know the the the few at the top to
exploit the many at the bottom so
whether you're thinking about the
development of the gun or the Industrial
Revolution and extractive economies what
we see is that Tech without intention
without an understanding of impact and
assessment continues to create radiating
cycles of pattern
and violence and as someone who is you
know
um a daughter of people who have been
cast oppressed you know
um you know I am a dullet and you know
in our context in South Asia and you
know our big intersectional system that
we deal with is the caste system and you
know just like in the context of race
where you're dealing with white
supremacy we deal with brahmanism you
know the the people who develop the
scriptures that basically enslaved our
peoples for many years and what I've
learned is is that you can't actually
begin to imagine radical Futures until
you slow down and examine where in you
have you experienced introduction
intergenerational trauma and violence
from structures of exclusion and I think
that we are in a reckoning that
understands that the tech that is being
pushed forth by Capital that you know
feels too big to fail and they can never
be stopped actually can be stopped Tech
doesn't exist in some sort of like you
know engine of possibility it is created
by people it is sustained by people and
so Within These big massive institutions
that are there are individuals that can
make different choices that say I don't
want to be part of a system of death
I want to choose life
and I think that's part of the call that
I would really love to you know issue
for folks right now is what are ways
that we can choose life together what
are ways that we can slow down the need
of us addressing the flow of capital by
pushing and pushing and pushing and
grabbing and grabbing and grabbing we're
not in some sort of model of the digital
Manifest Destiny that if we don't grab
this real estate someone else will that
is a deficit model that comes from
Predator systems like white supremacy
when we really understand what is it
that we want to do when we want to build
a tool that will connect us as a species
we have so many other options that come
other come from other scientific World
Views and if we don't see ourselves like
within the Cartesian split where our
body is separated from the spirit from
each other we have opportunities to look
at the ways that we are all connected
with the web of life
and you know I think about that a lot
with um the the current phase of the
internet because you know for me like
you know as someone who was a dullet you
know it was very scary to grow up um
cast depressed you know you faced a lot
of violence and
um discrimination and you know the the
power of the internet was that it
connected people across you know bias
and divides and atrocity and as someone
who was one of the first dullet people
who was able to be present and be out
you know it was a really joyous
experience in the beginning because you
could say your truth and people would
resonate with that truth and then you
would build community and all of a
sudden you went from being this person
that was so uh bereft and cut off from
um you know kinship uh to someone who
was connected and had family all around
the world
and then of course the structures that
were made without our consent you know
because even though they operate as like
Community spaces they're fundamentally
corporate surveillance spaces that were
designed to make us the product
um what we saw is this like wonderful
community space eventually become what
was meant to be you know a place that
harvests us harvests our data
um and polarizes us and really actually
connects us in a false sense of uh
community and and that's some of the
deeper things that I would really want
to encourage people to think about is
that
you know when you think about the work
of um you know Dr Steven porges and the
idea of the polyvagal theory which you
know assumes that you know as human
beings our nervous systems you know
evolved for us to connect with each
other to find the regulation of our
nervous systems through connection and
face and our emotions are really the
ways that we create a system with each
other you know we are essentially you
know creating our own mycilial network
you know in our species by connection
and so the tool that was built you know
whether it's Facebook or YouTube or
SnapChat or Tick Tock they have the
appearance of connection but without the
benefit of nervous co-regulation in fact
quite the opposite happens like I can't
tell you how many people that we come
across that we're working with who tell
us like I'm so stressed out about being
on the internet I might have fomo or I
might have people sending me rape
threats or in the case of dullets like
we have people who you know use all
sorts of castlers and disgusting things
to dehumanize us and you are in a state
of your nervous system constantly being
stimulated constantly being under attack
and it's the exact opposite of the
conditions that you need to be able to
emotionally co-regulate with someone you
know it is fast Speedy without thought
so it's actually tapping into some of
the most you know Primal parts of your
nervous system and what we see as a
result is that people are increasingly
polarized polarized polarized
particularly as they're abetted by
algorithms that are biased and benefit
from us being in filter bubbles where
they can shape us you know tame us and
ultimately make money off of our demise
and I think that again you know as
someone who's a Buddhist when I see that
process when I see how disconnected
we're becoming even in these tools that
are meant to connect us
uh I would like to encourage us to you
know think about a different kind of
metaverse
and in you know in Buddhism there's this
idea of meta which is like loving
kindness and I would just you know
Wonder like what would happen if we were
to think about not Capital as the core
of the worlds that we build but love
and possibility and hope what if we were
to create a meta verse in the context of
loving kindness and that all of the ways
that we learn to communicate with each
other in this virtual world were about
us being embodied as we spoke and worked
with each other were about us being
having tools for us to be more
self-aware about
um uh what's happening with our nervous
system when we're interacting in with
content and that would allow us to both
pause and also be prepared for
courageous conversation when there is
disagreement
these are all the things that we can be
able to achieve if we have a
trauma-informed approach both in terms
of how we're dealing with our historical
legacies but also how those inform this
very particular contentious moment but
also in the ways that we want to build
uh the future that we need to together
and it might sound like a radical
proposition to try to consider bringing
in trauma-informed practices in the ways
that we build these processes but I
think it's super critical for us to be
able to do that
wow welcome back everybody oh my gosh
then Maury what a powerful presentation
um you know I don't even know where to
to begin
um I think that you know as as Doreen
mentioned in the comments um we need new
metaphors
um because the ones that we have are
continue as you meant as you explained
are continuing to
ACC accentuate so many different harms
really dangerous harms
um and
I think that you know to to start off
um I I really wanted you to come in and
be one of the first talks of the of the
festival because your your talk poses so
many questions and really Roots us in a
way of thinking
um about these issues and about these
topics
um and you know you you go into this in
the in the in the talk but what are
those questions and how should people
like what things should people be
keeping in mind first and foremost so
that we can start building things in a
way that more closely matches the the
ethics and the morals that that we hold
well I think what's really important is
that we we don't give in to the crisis
of imaginary that capitalism uh really
puts us in which is that these processes
these companies are too big to fail and
that we have to be on their timeline
their design protocols and their
delivery of services and product
um without uh without question you know
and I feel like there is you know that's
why I was saying like in when I was
watching all of this you know kind of
those three streams where you're
watching these incredible harms that are
coming out from whistleblowers
um every day related to Facebook
um and you're seeing an unprecedented
layer of like worker strikes all around
the country and you compare that with
the bizarre and disconnected PR push for
the metaverse and um it's just like
there's such a dissonance like our
species is really at a level of Crisis
we cannot continue the way that we've
been going God to this point and and I
feel like the people who have caused
harm are not listening you know frankly
like if I was Mark Zuckerberg I would
say time out I need to be in a room with
no internet and no other digital
protocols for like two years and reflect
upon the fact that the tech I created
has brought multiple democracies to heal
and have abetted genocides and coups not
the least of which is in our country why
on Earth would someone who has created
Tech that has such severe consequences
then be leaning into a new direction of
the metaverse I just I find that so
absurd and yet we've seen that over and
over again from white supremacy whether
it's the extraction economy or um uh the
ways that we even hear the language of
manifest destiny it's like there's the
only the only thing we could do is
colonize Mars the only thing we can do
is desecrate you know
um our landscape and to do this with our
etheric realm with the ways that we
would imagine and put ourselves into
um virtual space with each other and I
think you know what we need to do is
stop pretending that white supremacists
um you know technology is the only
scientific worldview that we can
actually draw upon to build species
level technology and I think that's part
of the questions we need to really start
to act to ask ourselves is that the
Cartesian split that informs so many of
the ideas that are behind Enlightenment
informed scientific methods is not the
only worldview game in town and so I'm
just wondering if we slowed ourselves
down
took a pause and said what other World
Views that look at connection that look
at the self that look at what
interconnectedness means for us as you
know individual beings to the species
and to
um you know to existence can we draw
upon to create models for our tools and
and I think that requires a huge reset
you know and I think Doreen before we
were talking you were talking about like
I really hope that we're in this moment
where we stop seeing you know um stuff
being driven from the global North and I
was like absolutely you know the answers
for what the species needs is very
abundantly shown that it cannot be
developed in the global North we need to
unleash creators and dreamers and
Architects from the global South that
intimately have a very different world
view about what connection means and can
dream differently you know and I imagine
like what if the metaverse was like
developed by witches and dreamers and
you know uh single moms who you know
lived in villages what would that
metaverse look like you know I don't
think we need another disaster that
we've seen social media beget for us you
know
absolutely and I also think that you
know taking that into account also
requires
asking
in a way who gets to design if that's
the proper word for it who gets to be
signed if you do who gets to decide how
the future looks like right
when actually when you think about the
future it is something that feels more
like an expanded present rather than a
very bizarre destination that is I don't
know like sometimes when I see these
technological innovations and the way
that a lot of white sees men from
Silicon Valley are looking into the
future or the so-called future it always
um in a way
encompasses
a time frame that is not even available
for us to actually think about when we
are in a constant state of Crisis right
so I kept on thinking within your talk
about the current state or the current
would say
ecosystem of Mexico City and even though
Mexico City of course is a very
beautiful place to live in
it also has a lot of issues that are so
unresolved at the moment that doesn't
necessarily allow us to look into the
future as in 50 70 100 years right so
how are we going to build that future if
we cannot Envision that at the moment
and I kept on thinking how do you think
maybe we can start uh broadening that
conversation especially from within
perhaps not necessarily just the art and
culture but just maybe in within I don't
know like
um experimental pedagogies or
experimental approaches for building
together or for at least imagining
together because in a way sometimes the
reason why of course I mean you know
kind of quoting this really uh famous
um you know a notion of why can we
envision the what is it why is it easier
for us to Envision the end of the world
rather than Envision the end capitalism
or the end of racism or the end of
whatever other
urgent topic we have currently on our
hands and and I think of course the
answer to that question is because we've
been developing a lot of different ways
of Imagining the end of the world we
haven't been working let's say working
perhaps working is not the word for it
but Imagining the end of other things
that need to end earlier than the end of
the world I don't know I mean um I am
just curious on what's your perspective
on how or where should we maybe start
fostering these conversations perhaps
it's not necessarily just the arts and
culture but other places as well and I
don't know what's your your perspective
on on that or your experience of course
on that
well I think we have to imagine like our
lives depended on it you know we have
seeded the realm of the imaginary to
Capital not always by Will right you
know the you know the the you know the
pro the powers of white supremacy and
colonialism is such that they asserted
their imaginary on multiple World Views
for
um you know centuries right
um but to be able to take back that
right you know and to me I remember the
very you know clear moment when I
decided I was a futurist I was at MIT
and I would be at these like Gatherings
of like all white men in AC rooms
talking about the future of things and I
was like how do they know the future for
you know a single mother in a village in
Bihar how how on Earth would they know
when they've never stepped on the soil
they've never smelt the air and touched
the leaves and the trees that she knows
it's like utterly absurd but in order to
be able to bring parody to the image
imaginary we need to start looking at
futurism as a decentralized
participatory process where lots of
different people and lots of different
fields can start to dream
and dreaming is actually much harder in
a time of grief right when we have just
come out of the pandemic and numerous
countries are facing you know
authoritative regimes and you know the
the incredible loss of life and
instability at this moment it feels like
dreaming is the most
um
luxurious thing to do but in fact we are
kind of Trapped in the nightmare of
capital and so there there's a very
specific decision we have to make to say
that path is not ours you know that is
you know like some one one idea I always
had when I was in the pandemic is like
how did I get stuck in this timeline
somewhere there is a happy thin way
in another Multiverse that is living
without a pandemic but I actually think
we have to take those tools of of being
able to say this is not our this is not
the timeline we need let's imagine what
that other is and I think sometimes when
you think about big institutions like
whether you're thinking about
intergovernmental organizations or
you're thinking about you know nation
states it feels so hard to detach
from those violent nightmares but I
think you begin small you know because I
think the imaginary and radical
imagining it's like a muscle it's it's
as much like process as it is practice
and sometimes when people are grief like
you know it really just shuts you down
so I think we need like a wreck a
radical practice of making even if it's
small things you know I'm Gonna Make You
know
um you know tools for a world that has
you know looking at um uh looking at
ways of like living in a solar Punk
world you know what do they wear in
terms of hats what is a world that's
already had Collective labor look like
you know what are the kinds of companies
that form you know what are the clothes
that you wear for variable
um climate
um uh and you know volatile climate
conditions and in that I think that
making itself actually is a way to
restart your own engine of joy and to be
able to start to see possibility so my
sense is that it's not going to take
there's not going to be one person that
drops here's the manifesto for the
future let's roll with it you know we
actually or did we already did that with
like the the you know the modern version
of futurism and that's like not the one
that we want what we need is lots of
decentralized futurisms where people are
exploring and building Alternatives out
of the ashes of what we're seeing of a
failed system but we don't have to stay
in those failures we need to begin you
know micro experiments that then like
fractals can become bigger and bigger as
we see successes as people start to see
new ways of interacting building social
relationships and economic relationships
and also you know knitting back consent
into all of those different Realms that
we interact with because part of what's
broken right now is we live in a society
without consent you know we didn't
consent to the rape of the earth we
didn't consent to the exploitation of
our labor we didn't consent to Colonial
borders that limit migration Mission
when people have migrated for many years
across land masses so to read change
reshift we need to trust ourselves that
we can dream ourselves and heal
ourselves and that's a very different
kind of protocol than what's coming out
of venture capital which is you know the
scarcity model like we have to do the
metaverse whoever builds the meta verse
first is going to be the one that
controls it you know I kept thinking of
like as I was reading some of those
screeds I was thinking about like the
eye of Sauron you know you know one ring
to rule them all it was like one
metaverse to trap us all you know and
what we would see is like you know these
very you know it was reminding me of
that like Pink Floyd lyric you know you
traded tree you know hot ashes for trees
you know we don't need connection that
is false and we don't need hollowed out
versions of what true interconnected is
true interconnection can be when we can
take a little bit of a slower time and
bring more voices to the co-design to
table and experiment
um to creating you know that you know
like in the Buddhist sense a metaverse
you know a place of kindness a place of
empathy and a place of consent and joy
absolutely I think that's such a I mean
it's such a beautiful sentiment and it's
something that I've been thinking about
a lot you know I do a lot of work with
nft artists and
um and in in that in the kind of crypto
Community where this these sorts of
conversations just feel so
like intense because it's something is
changing you know there's a moment where
people feel like there could be a
rewrite of a certain protocol and what
we're seeing instead is just the same
kinds of exclusionary practices that are
rooted in capitalist extraction just
pervade oh again and again and again and
become more uh cemented in the protocol
um and you know one thing that I've been
arguing for since the very beginning is
that we can't have an nft economy that's
rooted in a Marketplace it needs to be
rooted in experience because that's what
the artwork is about like if we're just
treating these things as Commodities if
we're just working in this way that is
continuing to feed this machine we can't
actually get to that place of connection
where I share an image and it connects
to you and we have a moment of through
the through the wires through the Fiber
Optic Cables through the networks that
actually brings us together in a way
that as you said is really rooted in in
love
um and I think that you know while we're
while we're talking about this we have a
question from the audience that I think
is
quite relevant
um and Oddball asks how much of
Facebook's detrimental influence is due
to something novel Facebook is doing
versus simply being an amplifier for
existing human behaviors and existing
systems of Oppression and Injustice and
how might we get the benefits of social
networks and Global Communication while
discouraging the harmful Behavior
and I'd love to hear your both of your
thoughts on this
well I think that there's you know
there's the way that I would answer it
in terms of like what do we need out of
a tech that can connect us as a species
and what is Facebook doing wrong so I'd
kind of like partition it separately and
I spoke a little bit about this in my
talk but I feel like you know when you
look at the way that our nervous systems
have evolved they have evolved to
co-regulate with each other that's like
the heart of the polyvagal theory right
is that we need connection we're
connecting our nervous system settle and
get to a basal equilibrium when we have
human connection
um the approximation that social media
is supposed to you know have of that
connection is actually not only a bad
one but also it doesn't actually offer a
way for equilibrium and nervous reset in
fact it keeps you in a state of constant
nervous D dysregulation and I would
argue that in some of the ux theory and
market theory that companies like
Facebook are doing there are banking on
that they want to keep you in a state of
nervous dysregulation because fear and
anger are huge drivers in your filter
bubbles which makes you want to click
more and stay more and give them more
money you know so they're trapping Us in
like you know these illusory Hells of
our own traumatized nervous system right
and
um and so I think that there's actually
lots of different ways to slow down to
have people be thoughtful and I think
some of it requires us to have greater
legibility to our somatic responses to
uh uncomfortable conversations to
um to things that um you know can
actually instead of being wounds could
be portals into shared communication and
so in some ways like what we need is not
just technologists at the table we need
psychologists we need people who
um understand it a deep deep level how
do we create more resilience related to
racial and class and gender and past
discomfort
um we are becoming incredibly brittle
and unable to create societal consensus
in part because social media is training
us to stop the process of listening and
regulation to that end so I actually
think we need a whole redesign of that
process and for example like in real
life like if I was talking to Wade and
you said something that really upset me
I could take a beat right
and be like okay I'm gonna you know
breathe a little bit because whatever
Wade said it's a signal that comes to me
and if my nervous system is set to be
triggered I can act in an amplified way
or I could take a little time to
attenuate that signal
and be relaxed and be like okay I'm not
in a survival situation but I'd like to
talk wait and see if we could actually
come to a consensus you know you can't
do that in social media the way that
it's constructed and it was never meant
to do that you know so it's kind of like
would you take you know a lawnmower to
help you with surgery no and actually
all the people that built Facebook along
the way are totally incompetent when it
comes to psychology cultural competence
you know the aspects of democracy what
they do know how to do is to exploit and
make money and this isn't like all of
the workers at these companies I'm
talking about the c-suite level they
knew exactly what they were doing to
capture their Market their goal was
never about connection it was about
capturing the market and I think that's
why I'm so outraged
um at looking at what uh the discussion
is coming from uh these Bad actors you
know is that they know better they know
exactly what they did and we as a
community we I also have a role because
we are employees at these companies we
are users of these companies we actually
can say we don't want to participate in
our own Extinction
we can say we want another way you know
I mean absolutely I mean and just to
just attack on I think the example of
this that is the easiest to understand
you know of you know a really concrete
way of how this works is look at the
look at your computer I mean it's called
look at the design of your computer it's
called a desktop we have a recycling bin
we have files and folders this entire
our portal into the metaverse is
constructed upon a capitalist White
Collar version of Labor and defines our
experience through that through that uh
through that lens
um and that's at the very very Baseline
you know that doesn't include any of the
visible any of the invisible things that
we can't see like you know uh Wendy Chen
who's gonna speak later this weekend
talks a lot in her one of her favorite
books of mine uh control and freedom
about you know how data how data packet
switching works and who we don't the
average internet user has no concept of
what's happening in the wires in their
home to make this happen
um and all of it's been designed in a
really particular way
um and so I don't know that just it just
feels so cogent to me
um doing did you have something you
wanted to add
yeah and I just wanted to add that also
sometimes I think we have this feeling
of unease you know of of not being able
to do anything about it which I think is
also of course designed into this whole
conversation right by all of these
interfaces that are being built in there
in a very particular way for us to feel
like that but then at the same time
I think that the more that we I don't
know that we get engaged with these
conversations the more that we can
create and imagine like you said on your
talk
new metaphors for it like that that is
what we need as well like we need to
start envisioning that because the
metaphors that we have right now not
only are not useful but are very harmful
as well and it comes from of course also
the imaginary
um that we create and build of where
what's our role within all of this
conversation right and I kept on
thinking a lot about how like very very
recently I had this conversation with my
with my grandma and she was like but why
is this Facebook guy super rich like he
doesn't charge for you know for the
service and she was like trying to make
sense of that and I think you know like
for her it just doesn't make sense to
have something that is apparently free
and available for everyone to use and
apparently this is a service that you'll
be you know in a way benefited by
and when I started talking with her
about you know like well it works in a
different way and actually what happens
is that you get told you are the the
product anyway you are commodified and
you are and you become a series of
numbers and data that then afterwards
gets sold and well whatever happens next
right but then again I thought like well
it is very interesting to have this
conversation with my grandma you know
because even though that she doesn't
have Facebook she doesn't you know
participate perhaps actively within
these particular platforms I think that
at some point it also the conversation
has also escaped elsewhere you know and
it comes from the newspaper and comes
from the TV and the news that she sees
on TV and then she starts wondering what
are we doing with all of these you know
why is this why if this sounds so bad
why do we treat it as if it was
something we cannot get rid of
when we have never really needed that
before
and whatever we need at the moment is
definitely not bad right well and I
think that's why I would again I was so
triggered by all of these like terrible
announcements about the metaverse is
that you know who asked these
to like drop this right
now honestly who who you know I'm I'm
sitting and thinking about the level of
genocide that has occurred just let's
just take South Asia you know we've seen
Myanmar go into genocide and now they're
in a coup
um in India we are in a genocidal moment
and every you know there was a pilgrim
last year on the platform and
um and there are millions of people in
camps with 15 camps already built
and it's going to get worse and I would
just I just think that they're not even
letting us grieve and think about how
violent this moment is and I'm just so
struck by like while our people are just
digging up the bones and trying to make
sense of the harm that's caused they're
still trying to steal the Stars you know
and it's just and it's it's an absurd
you know forward push that we need to
just stop and you know I think that you
know this is a really great place to
think about rest my Monaco's work where
he talks about white supremacy being
white body Supremacy where there is a
lived somatized experience of trauma
that you know racially oppressed people
face but also so do white folks and
whether it's the the trauma of
complicity the trauma of actually being
a perpetrator or a harm doer there are
ways that those nervous systems are
trained to just rush past harm that has
occurred and I'm really asking for
people that are in those companies you
cannot keep working for these companies
that they destroy our Earth and destroy
our democracies as someone who knows
people who have been personally harmed
in pilgrims and who are dealing with the
the chaos this is American companies
that are doing this and I always think
back to like Hannah Arendt who talked
about this idea of like
um the bureaucratic murderer or the
desktop murderer is that you don't have
to pick up a gun to kill millions of
people think about all the people that
are building the cold be building the
code that are the Integrity Civic
Integrity designers that are saying oh
we're trying to make the tool better
even as the tool is causing a coup in
the United States you did not do your
job it's actually impossible to do your
job because the entire platform is
bankrupt and corrupt so at a certain
point we have to decide what are we
doing here and we can't take slow
measures when we're talking about you
know detention camps being built and and
I I know wage you have family that
survived the Holocaust I think one of
the most terrible things you can do is
damn your children to having to
reconcile the fact that you allowed
genocide to happen on their watch and I
think of all of the children and all of
these societies that are so polarized
what a terrible burden you've unleashed
on them that they have to heal the
divides of polarization that is just
some foul and in the context of
that the fact that we're sitting here
and saying okay we're gonna we're just
gonna keep building Tech we're gonna go
colonize other planets we're going we're
not going to sit with the problems that
we've created and I think we have a
responsibility as creators as
technologists as Visionaries to say
before we can build anything further we
need to address the harm we need to sit
with our pain and our grief and we need
to be able to look at how do we actually
restore and repair from harm and that's
that's also part of World building right
that's what that's what forests do right
when a tree falls in the forest it's not
like the forest is like let's put
another tree there you know that's the
role of the mycilial network and
mushrooms they break it down and it's
not just that they're breaking it down
they're consuming it and they're they're
really making it back into Fertile Earth
we need to look at our problems and the
harms and use the wound as a door to be
able to say we know harm has occurred
this is how we got here we're never
going to do it again and in so doing we
can actually process and make plans in
co-design in a much different way
absolutely wow um we're right we're
quickly running out of time I think we
might be a little bit out of time but I
just want to you know thank you so much
to MOSI for that that was really
incredible before we close
um I just wanted to ask you a little bit
about a little a little a little bit
about the quality labs and the work that
you're doing there because I know that
you have a really um a really rich
activist practice
um in your work and I'd love to you know
tell the audience a little bit more
about what you do there and how they
might be able to get involved
sure so equality Labs is adult civil
rights organization and we work on the
issue of caste you know which is one of
the oldest systems of Oppression in the
world
um you know and the way that it operates
in many domains you know and uh all of
our experiments whether they're in Tech
or in culture or in political advocacy
or in learning are always about how do
we end cast apartheid gender-based
violence and religious intolerance but I
don't think you get there just by
blocking strategies you also get there
by Visionary strategies and you know
they'll let feminist feminist Futures
have a long tradition in South Asia and
I consider myself a futurist and many
many dullet thinkers you know have
always tried to imagine a society that
was free of caste and you know there was
this really beautiful thinker named Guru
ravidas who imagined a world where
nobody you know a city called begumpura
where nobody was hungry and people
walked hand in hand and women were free
as were people and there was never an
empty bowl because everyone was fed and
um and comforted and I think that
whether it's that moment there or the
way that I see the the radical dullet
feminist survivors imagining a world
without
um rape and thinking about how we can
return consent to all of the domains
that we operate in you know our work in
equality Labs is really about that and
so there's advocacy there's technology
development that we do and culture
shifting because this is a time when we
need dreamers and you know you know when
you think about cast it impacts over 1.6
billion people in the world it's one of
the largest intersectional systems of
you know structural exclusion and so we
do our best to platform dullet people
into many different Arenas in my work
I'm both an artist and a technologist
and so I create art and look at ways we
might be able to address these issues
um but I think for folks that want to
get involved you can always catch us on
equal labs.org or catch us on Instagram
or Twitter and you know we always try to
provoke questions and also find new ways
to see the terrains of cast and it was
some of our research that really
documented the level of castis harm uh
you know that was coming out of Facebook
and other social media platforms as well
as working with workers all across the
world who are seeing castism in their
workplace and so you know last year you
know for folks that are in California
you'll know that the California
Department of fairness and employment
and housing sued an American corporation
Cisco for castism in their workplace and
since then we have worked with cast
oppressed workers you know in many
companies who are working to try to
address the issue of castism there so
you know I think you know in our work
we're very multi-dimensional and but
always filled with joy and always look
forward to kind of building and scheming
with new collaborators so just please
reach out
well
um that's amazing you guys can go to
equalitylabs.org to learn more and I'll
also note not to sound too much like a
vlogger but you guys have some really
cool merch that kind of uh you know adds
some visibility to the cause and
supports the organization so check that
out audience members if you get a chance
then Maureen it was so wonderful to have
you thank you thank you so much for
being here
um this is wonderful
amazing so glad to be here and doreen's
so wonderful to share space with you as
well
thank you and thank you for the talk and
let's keep the conversation I just
wanted to share really quickly
the conversation no I kept on thinking
about these uh this quote that was very
very used during the 90s here in Mexico
with the Chiapas and La condona jungle
struggle that was um from subcomandate
Marcos who said
um
I want a world where a lot of other
worlds can fit and I think this makes
perfect sense with what you've been
working on the movie and um well thank
you thank you so much wow what a perfect
what a perfect quote to sum it up Serene
wow that was wonderful
um I'm conscious that we're running a
little bit behind schedule which is
great there's so much interesting
conversations happening and so just if
you're watching this we're probably
going to be going a little bit late on
some of the other conversations later
this evening
um we're gonna break for just a minute
or two and prepare the next talk uh
we'll be on with uh Hawaiian Maori
artist uh tiari repo in just a few
minutes and again then worry thank you
for being here